All right, in our last topic, we derived the notion of a relativistic Doppler shift, and in doing
so, that allowed us to get more accurate results.
But we did pay a small price, as you can tell through the equation right here.
It's much more convoluted than the initial approach we use for calculating Doppler shifts, but it will
give us more accuracy.
Now in that video, what I notice is that at least for Doppler or rather radar applications with the
Doppler shift, a lot of manmade targets are not traveling close to the speed of light.
So as a result of that, we do not necessarily have to use the relativistic Doppler shift.
And I know what you're thinking.
You're probably thinking, Wait a minute, why don't we spend all that time and effort driving this
more accurate approach?
If for radar applications, we could just use the easier simplified version of the Doppler shift?
What's going on here?
Why do we do this?
And there is a method to my madness because what I'm going to do in this video is I'm going to show
you how we can take the relativistic Doppler shift and how it can provide some useful information in
different applications.
The application were to take a look at in this particular video is known as a redshift, and this pops
up in astrophysics and in particular cosmology, which is sort of like the study of the universe.
In particular, we're going to look into is, does the universe expand?
Is it static?
What's going on?
What kind of ideas can support or disprove the Big Bang Theory that we sort of take for granted nowadays?
These are the different topics I'm going to discuss in this video.
Before we do that, we need to take a look at line spectra.
Now, as we talked about with Doppler shifts, what's going on is the frequency is being changed based
upon the distance that the light has to travel.
So what you can do is if we're studying, let's say, galaxies, stars or other cosmological or astrophysical
objects, what we can do is we could take a look at the light spectrum that is being transmitted from
that star.
OK, so I have written right here the first part of the board when light is emitted from the core of
a star.
What happens is certain wavelengths or colors are absorbed by specific atoms.
OK, so when the light is created at the core of the Sun, they're going to be different and particularly
hydrogen, for example, that are going to absorb that light.
And when we receive the whole spectrum of that light, certain frequencies and wavelengths are going
to be missing, which correspond to certain colors that were absorbed by atoms.
Now this begs the question why does that happen while these atoms are absorbing that light?
And those frequencies?
Because as we learned quantum physics, electrons and atoms, hydrogen, for example, they absorb quantized
or fixed amounts of energy when they get excited and jump to the next level that they're actually traveling
or exhibiting it.
So when those electrons jump in, absorb those lights, it's always going to be the same amount of energy.
And as we're going to learn in the next section, that's the amount of energy is tied to the frequency.
So certain colors, wavelength frequencies are going to be absorbed and they're going to be missing
from the line spectrum that we analyze.
OK, so go to the next part.
This usually results in absorption or Fraunhofer lines, and Fraunhofer was the individual who actually
identified this phenomenon first.
But it results in those lines in the star's measured light spectrum.
So we're going to get these blank missing lines in the spectrum and a spectrum, if you've never seen
that before.
Basically, I sort of have a limitation right here where you can plot up the different colors at different
wavelengths, where the wavelength is the x axis and you know, you're going to at different wavelengths,
you're going to have different colors.
So when we have these absorption lines, we're going to have a blank missing portion.
And regardless of where this takes place, you would expect, you know, if a star has just hydrogen,
that probably wouldn't happen.
But if we're taking a look at hydrogen, we would expect a star at this point in the star at this place
at the same kind of absorption.
So we expect that Black Line always to be at the same place when we look at any kind of expects spectrum.
So next, comparing these absorption lines to line spectra of the same atoms measured in a lab in a
stationary lab setting, we can find that the absorption lines have shifted a wavelength or frame.
So what's going to happen is you start looking at these, this light in these spectra that are coming
in.
And if you compare that to the same experiment, right, you take an atom.
What you would expect their line to be their line spectra and you compare the two.
We see that this this absorption line has shifted.
Now we know that atoms are always going to store the same amount of frequency.
So what we can deduce and is the point of this video is that the difference in the wavelength so I have
a before and after right here.
So, you know, maybe hydrogen has I think it's hydrogen gamma, which absorbs a blue light at a certain
wavelength, if that's shifted by this delta lambda.
What does that mean?
That means it must be a Doppler shift.
And if a star is moving away from us, what does that mean?
It means that the distance between us and the star are getting larger, which means that the light has
to travel or travel a larger distance.
That's the idea of a Doppler shift that we talked about.
So the wavelength is going to increase and the frequency is going to decrease.
OK.
So what happens?
We know that red colors.
Occur at higher wavelengths of the wavelength that's going to increase as described by this equation
here.
I spent a lot of time driving that.
We're going to see a shift in that wavelength from blue bluer colors to red, and I don't have a lot
of markers of this sort of a simplified drawing.
But if it's moving away, if it's receding, you get what is known as a shift red direction and that's
called a red shift.
That's what we call a red shift a red shift to higher wavelengths, right?
So you can deduce that the star perhaps is receding or moving away from us.
OK.
Conversely, if something is moving towards you, the distance is getting smaller.
So the crests and the the the travels, they're going to hit you more frequently, which means that
your frequency jumps up, but your wavelength jumps down.
So that's the opposite effect, right?
So if we had something like this and we have the star lights emitting the light, moving closer to us
compared to the same atom absorbing the lights on Earth.
We're going to get what is known as a blue shift, OK?
In other words, the wave is going to decrease, the frequency is going to blow up and we go from a
red color to a blue color.
OK, so that's all the names mean red shift and blue shift try to signify what what direction the Doppler
shift actually occurs.
And in order to make sense of this, we have another mathematical term that tries to describe this.
So I'm going to derive both of these these red shifts in terms of relativistic quantities and non relativistic
quantities.
So for the relativistic redshift, what we're interested in is the change in this wavelength respect
to the original wavelength that was sent out.
So we describe that as a parameter z you're going to see in the literature.
It's described as the Doppler shift in wavelength lambda prime minus the original emitted wavelength
lambda.
Not over lambda, not OK.
So if we take our Doppler shift in a relativistic situation, which we derive right here, we plop this
guy in here and do some some work massage his equation a bit.
What we find is that right?
We got these two radicals one plus v rollover C divided by one minus the radical V relative.
Oversee all that under our square root.
Last, we multiplied by the original wavelength and we subtract the original wavelength.
What we do is we come in here, we say, Oh, wait a second, we got this.
This guy cancels with that, it cancels with that.
And what we end up with is basically all the turns with these radicals right here, it's preserved minus
one.
Now it doesn't look as nice.
So what you sometimes see in a lecture is you get this one plus c equal to basically all the math you
have to do to sort of simplify it a bit.
But what can we do with this equation?
Why is this?
Why is this useful and why did astronomers and astrophysicists actually derive this?
Well, in order to understand that we need to look at two situations, we can know that after we calculate
Z.
If Z is greater than zero, if it's positive, that means that the delta, it means that this guy was
larger than that, which means we red shifted, right?
You can see that right here.
If this is positive, if it's greater than zero, it means that compared to our original wavelength
right, we increased right.
So it's sort of like a relative comparison and helps you make quick analytical decisions.
That's why it's useful.
So I fear for z greater than zero.
The object has a receding velocity, which is going away from the observer.
In other words, the star galaxy, whatever kind of astronomical object you want to talk about, food
is getting further and further away from us, OK?
So that's what we have here.
But if Z is less than zero to the negative number, that's the opposite.
That means that this guy got smaller than the original wavelength that delta is negative.
As a result of that, we can deduce that the object, the star, whatever its root, is moving closer
to us, OK?
So it's the opposite effect, and the find really governs the analytical phenomena that's arising right
in front of our eyes.
Now we see this and I said previously, you know, relativistic Doppler shifts, you know, the math
is not nice.
We have these two radicals.
It's not super nice.
So if we're dealing with slow moving objects, which, uh, sometimes is the case, not as often the
astrophysics.
That's why we're saying this, right?
I'm trying to say that relativistic double shifts do have some kind of use, but if we're looking at
an object that's moving away or coming closer at a very slow speed, what we can do is we can have a
non relativistic redshift.
And in essence, we just do the same thing.
So I'm going to run through that really quickly and show how can drastically simplify the math, make
your life easier.
OK, so we have the same kind of approach.
We take the Doppler shifted wavelength line to prime, minus the original land and not over land and
not.
And that is approximately equal to the following well, if you recall previously.
We derived equation where it was like the frequency, if not over one minus the relevancy.
And to give you an idea of what I'm doing here.
The speed of light we know is equal to lambda times the frequency, right?
That's what we found in a previous video.
So taking the frequency equations we derived and also for what I have up here, we could translate it
into a wavelength form by simply doing the following.
We could just take C over a blank is equal to lambda.
So all we need to do is invert that equation.
Multiply by C the CS cancel because we have an f prime on the left and f prime on the right.
And we end up with the result we want, so originally, I believe we had an equation, something like
ethanol over one plus zero or 2C.
So you just flip it over and you get the equation you're looking for.
That's where this guy came from.
But we had that probably the first or second video.
Of the series, and we work through the math, we find that, you know, guess what?
Again, this original source guy drops out on both terms.
We get this one plus the relevancy minus one the one cancels and we just get nice, nice little high
result.
Right here made note that, yes, this is only valid when the relative velocity is much less than.